1 
 
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India 
No. RG-25/(25)/2023-QoS      Dated: March 13, 2026 
Consultation on Draft Telecom Commercial Communications Customer 
Preference (Third Amendment) Regulations, 2026. 
 To curb the menace of Unsolicited Commercial Communications (UCC). TRAI 
issued Telecom Commercial Communications Customer Preference Regulations, 
2018 (TCCCPR, 2018) on 19 th July, 2018, which put in place a framework for 
regulating Commercial Communication. The TCCCPR, 2018 was amended on 21 st 
December, 2018 and subsequently, second amendment was issued on 12th February 
2025. 
2.  Based on the feedback from stakeholders during various interactions well as 
in light of recent developments like implementation of  AI-based detection of UCC, by 
major access providers, a need has been felt to make amendments in some of the 
existing provisions, and also to add some new provisions to make the regulatory 
framework more effective and efficient. 
3. Accordingly, draft amendments to TCCCPR, 2018 have been proposed at 
Annexure-1 to this letter which also includes the Explanatory Note, outlining the 
rationale and explaining the necessity of the proposed amendments. For the ease of 
reference, a draft of consolidated TCCCPR, 2018, incorporating the proposed changes 
is also enclosed as Annexure-II.  
4. The aforesaid draft documents amendments to the regulations along with the 
explanatory note (Annexure-I) are available on the TRAI website www.trai.gov.in  for 
seeking input/comments from the stakeholders.  
5. The written comments on Annexure-I are invited from the stakeholders by 12 th 
April 2026, which may be sent preferably in electronic form to Sh Deepak Sharma, 
Advisor (QoS-Il), TRAI, on mail-id advqos@trai.gov.in along with detailed reasons and 
justifications in the format as given below: 
 
 
 

2 
 
Format for stakeholders’ response on draft amendments as in Annexure-I 
Sl. No Regulation 
number 
Sub-
regulation/ 
item 
number 
Modification 
proposed to the 
draft amendment 
Reasons/ full 
justification for the 
proposed 
modifications 
     
     
     
 
6. Stakeholders may also suggest any other modifications/additions/deletions 
in the TCCCPR, 2018, in the same format as above by 12th April 2026. 
7.   The written comments/ suggestions received from the stakeholders shall be 
published on the TRAI website www.trai.gov.in. The stakeholders may give their 
counter comments by 27 th April, 2026, which may be sent preferably in electronic 
form to Sh Deepak Sharma, Advisor (QoS-Il), TRAI, on mail-id advqos@trai.gov.in 
along with detailed reasons and justifications in the same format as given at para 5 
above.   
8. For any clarification/ information, Shri Deepak Sharma, Advisor (QoS-Il), 
TRAI, may be contacted at 011-20907760 or at email-id advqos@trai.gov.in 
 
(Deepak Sharma) 
Advisor (QoS-II) 
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India 
Enclosures :  
(a) Annexure-I : The proposed draft amendment along with explanatory 
note. 
(b) Annexure-II : The consolidated draft regulation incorporating draft 
amendments, for ease of reference. 
 
 

3 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
 
Draft for Consultation 
    
    
  
 
   
 
भारतीय दूरसंचार िविनयामक ÿािधकरण  
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India 
  
  
   
  
  
Draft Telecom Commercial Communication Preference (Third Amendment) Regulations, 2026 
 
  
  
  
New Delhi, India  
13th March, 2026 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
World Trade Centre, Tower-F, (4" to 7" Floors), Nauroji Nagar, New Delhi- 110029 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Written Comments/suggestions on the Draft Telecom Commercial Communication 
Customer Preference (Third Amendment) Regulations, 2026, are invited from 
stakeholders by 12 th April, 2026. Comments/ suggestions received from the 
stakeholders will be posted on TRAI’s website www.trai.gov.in. The stakeholders 
may give their counter comments by 27 th April, 2026. The comments and counter 
comments, if any, may be sent preferably in electronic form to Sh Deepak Sharma, 
Advisor (QoS-Il), TRAI, on mail-id advqos@trai.gov.in along with detailed reasons 
and justifications in the specified format. 
For any clarification/ information, Shri Deepak Sharma, Advisor (QoS-II), TRAI, 
may be contacted at telephone no. 011-20907760 or at email-id 
advqos@trai.gov.in. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
5 
 
 
TO BE PUBLISHED IN THE GAZETTE OF INDIA, EXTRAORDINARY, 
PART III, SECTION 4 
 
TELECOM REGULATORY AUTHORITY OF INDIA 
NOTIFICATION 
New Delhi, the ____ 2026 
 
TELECOM COMMERCIAL COMMUNICATIONS CUSTOMER PREFERENCE (THIRD 
AMENDMENT) REGULATIONS, 2026  
(… of 2026) 
 
No.  RG-25/(25)/2023-QoS: - In exercise of the powers conferred upon it by section 36, 
read with sub-clause (v) of clause (b) and clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 11, of the 
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act 1997 (24 of 1997), the Telecom Regulatory 
Authority of India hereby makes the following regulations further to amend the Telecom 
Commercial Communications Customer Preference Regulations, 2018 (6 of 2018) 
namely:- 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. — 
(1) These regulations may be called the Telecom Commercial Communications Customer 
Preference (Third Amendment) Regulations, 2026 (… of 2026). 
(2) These regulations shall apply throughout the territory of India. 
(3) These shall come into force after thirty days from the date of their publication in the 
Official Gazette. 
2. In regulation 2 of the Telecom Commercial Communications Customer Preference 
Regulations, 2018 (6 of 2018)  (hereinafter referred to as the principal regulations), 
(a) after clause (e) the following clause shall be inserted, namely; 
“(ea) An A2P (Application-to-Person) call refers to a voice call that is initiated by an 
application, software system, or automated platform without direct human dialling 
and delivered to an individual telecom subscriber, including using autodialling, robo-
calls and/ or prerecorded/ artificial voice technologies.”  
(b) for clause (y), the following clause shall be substituted, namely: -  
“Explicit Consent” means such consent which has been either verified directly from 
the Recipient in a robust and verifiable manner and recorded by Consent Registrar; 
or, obtained by the sender through any verifiable means prior to or outside the 
6 
 
Consent Registration Function framework and subsequently registered in the 
Consent Register in accordance with the procedure specified by the Authority.” 
(c) in clause (ai), for the words “clause (3) of section 3 of the Indian Telegraph Act, 
1885 (13 of 1885)”, the words “clause (g) of section 2 of The Telecommunications 
Act, 2023 (44 of 2023)”, shall be substituted; 
(d) for clause (ba), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- 
“(ba) “Regulatory Sandbox” means a live testing environment where new products, 
services, processes, regulatory technology solutions and business models may be 
deployed for a limited set of eligible customers, for a specified period of time, with 
certain relaxations in the extant regulatory provisions in order to encourage and 
facilitate innovation and technological development in telecommunication; 
development and refinement of Code(s) of Practice; and provide inputs for 
regulatory interventions and modifications.” 
(e) for clause (bb), the following clause shall be substituted, namely: - 
“(bb) “Relationship” means a prior or existing relationship  
(i) for business or commercial reasons, between a person or entity and a 
subscriber with or without an exchange of consideration,  
(ii) on the basis of application regarding products or services made by or 
submitted by recipient to sender within the three months immediately preceding the 
date of the receiving of communication, which relationship has not been previously 
terminated by either party;” 
(f) in clause (bh), for the words “such Messages”, wherever appearing, the words 
“such messages or voice calls” shall be substituted; 
(g) in clause (bn), for the words “a telecom service provided by an Access Provider”  
the words “any service for telecommunication” shall be substituted; 
(h) in clause (bo), for the word “telegraph”, the words “telecommunication equipment 
and/or telecommunication identifier, as defined under The Telecommunications Act, 
2023 (44 of 2023)” shall be substituted; 
7 
 
(i) In clause (bw), the words “Any transactional message or transactional voice call”  
appearing twice shall be deleted from the first para. 
 
3.  In regulation 3 of the principal regulations, in sub-regulation (1), the following proviso 
shall be inserted, namely: - 
“Provided that Authority may classify the senders for this purpose and may specify different 
criteria for different classes of senders.” 
 
4. For regulation 4 of the principal regulations, the following regulation shall be substituted, 
namely:-  
“4. Intimation regarding use of A2P calls.- 
Every Sender shall declare to the Originating Access Provider, in advance, about the use of 
Application-to-Person (A2P) calls. 
Provided that any such call made by a sender without prior declaration to the OAP, shall 
be treated as unsolicited commercial communication (UCC), and the OAP shall take action 
against such sender as per the provisions of these regulations.” 
5. In regulation 11 of the principal regulations, in sub-regulation (4), the words “put under 
usage cap or his telecom resources may be” shall be deleted. 
 
6. After regulation 21 of the principal regulations, the following regulation shall be inserted, 
namely:-  
“21A. For taking action against the senders suspected of sending unsolicited commercial 
communication, as detected by the AI/ML-based UCC_Detect system established by the 
access providers in accordance with Schedule IV, every access provider shall implement the 
following:- 
(a) Every Terminating Access Provider (TAP), shall, through its AI/ML-based 
UCC_Detect system, identify and flag the Calling Line Identification (CLI) of the 
sender as “Suspected UCC CLI” based upon the behavioural parameters as 
8 
 
specified in the AI/ML-based UCC_Detect system, and immediately upon such 
flagging and in any case within two hours of such flagging, share, through the 
Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT) platform, the flagged CLI with the concerned 
Originating Access Providers (OAPs); 
(b) upon receipt of the flagged CLI from the TAP, every OAP shall immediately issue a 
notification through SMS or mail or both, to the sender associated with such CLI, 
informing that based on communication behaviour, the CLI has been flagged as 
suspected of sending UCC (spam)”; 
Provided that the authority may prescribe the format and manner of sending such 
notification from time to time. 
(c) OAP shall, within one business day of the receipt of the flagged CLI from  TAP, 
identify unique KYC identifiers of the sender associated with such CLI, using its 
subscriber records, and share the same through  DLT platform with all other Access 
Providers, who, within one business day of the receipt of such unique KYC 
identifiers from OAP, shall identify all the telecom resources allotted by them to such 
Sender; 
(d) upon identification of all the telecom resources allotted to such Sender, as referred 
in the preceding para, all the Access Providers including OAP, shall examine, within 
next one business day, whether any other CLI allotted to the same Sender has been 
flagged as “Suspected UCC CLI” by their respective AI/ML-based spam alert 
systems during the preceding ten days, and all such flagged CLIs mapped to the 
same sender shall be recorded and shared on  DLT platform by all the Access 
Providers on the same day; 
(e) upon receipt of the data of all  CLIs associated with such sender across the network, 
which have been flagged as “Suspected UCC CLI”, all the concerned OAPs shall 
check, within one business day of the receipt of such data, whether five  or more 
CLIs of the sender have been flagged as “Suspected UCC CLI” within a period of 
last ten days, and if it is found that five  or more CLIs of the sender have been 
flagged as “Suspected UCC CLI” within the last ten  days, all the concerned OAPs 
shall take action against the sender as follows: 
9 
 
(i) for the first such instance, OAP shall, within the next three business days, carry 
out the re-verification of KYC of the sender as per the licence conditions and take 
necessary action in accordance with the extant KYC guidelines; 
(ii) for the second such instance,  OAP shall, within the next five business days, 
carry out the physical KYC verification of the sender to ensure that the telecom 
resources allotted by  OAP are not being misused by the sender for sending UCC 
and  in case  KYC details of the sender, available with  OAP, do not match with 
the details obtained on physical verification, or if it is found that the telecom 
resources are being misused by the sender for sending UCC in violation of the 
provisions of the regulations, outgoing services of all telecom resources including 
PRI/SIP trunks, SIMs etc. allotted to the sender shall be barred by all the Access 
Providers for a period of fifteen days, irrespective of whether those telecom 
resources were actually used or not in making such communications; 
(iii) for any such subsequent instance, OAP shall, within the next five business days, 
carry out the physical KYC verification of the sender to ensure that the telecom 
resources allotted by  OAP are not being misused by the sender for sending UCC 
and in case  KYC details of the sender, available with  OAP, do not match with 
the details obtained on physical verification, or if it is found that the telecom 
resources are being misused by the sender for sending UCC in violation of the 
provisions of the regulations,  OAP shall take action against the sender as 
provided  under clause(b) of sub-regulation (6) of regulation 25 of the regulations. 
 
7. In regulation 22 of the of the principal regulations, in sub-regulation (1), for clause 
(a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- 
“(a) in case of misuse of Headers and/or Content Templates, 
(i) immediately suspend the use of such misused Header(s) and/or Content 
Template(s) across all Access Providers as the case may be, and the OAP shall issue 
a notice to the sender in whose name such Header(s) and/or Content Template(s) 
are registered, within 24 hours of reporting of misuse to the OAP. Such suspension 
10 
 
shall remain in force until the conditions specified under sub-clause (ii) are fully 
complied with by the sender. 
(ii) require the sender to undertake all of the following remedial actions: 
1. Reset, within 24 hours of receipt of notice from the Originating Access Provider 
(OAP), all access credentials including passwords, API keys and system 
permissions used for submission or delivery of commercial communications, 
which have been allotted to the sender by the access providers and 
telemarketers; 
2. File a formal complaint with the appropriate law enforcement agency under 
the applicable laws, within 2 business days of receipt of notice from the OAP, 
clearly identifying whether the misuse arose due to— 
i.  compromise of login credentials, 
ii. unauthorized access to systems, 
iii. misuse by an associated Telemarketer, Aggregator, or Delivery Entity, or 
iv.  any other identifiable cause, to be specified by the sender; and 
share with the OAP a copy of the complaint filed. 
Provided that, if any Telemarketer is an accomplice in the misuse of 
Headers or Content Templates, the Sender shall file a complaint against 
such Telemarketer with the law enforcement agencies under relevant laws; 
3. Where the Sender claims or the OAP determines that misuse occurred due to 
leakage, cloning, or compromise of credentials, the Sender, within next 5 
business days shall mandatorily de-register all its Headers and Content 
Templates including those reported as misused, and get them re-registered 
to obtain new header and template ids using the bulk tool provided by the 
concerned registrar access provider(s) to the sender for this purpose; and the 
sender shall ensure that previously compromised identifiers are not reused; 
11 
 
4. (a) Conduct within 10 business days of receipt of notice from the OAP, a 
comprehensive review of all its registered Headers, Content Templates, 
Consent Templates; and 
(b) Intimate to the OAP whether the misuse was due to credential leakage, 
compromise of IT systems or any other reason, to be specified by the sender.  
iii. Where the Sender fails to fully comply with the obligations under sub-clause (ii) 
within the stipulated timeframe, or provides an incomplete or false intimation, all 
commercial communication traffic from such Sender shall be suspended by all the 
Access Providers until compliance is achieved to the satisfaction of the OAP. 
Provided that the Authority may, from time to time, prescribe any other procedures, 
safeguards, timelines, and conditions to safeguard the security of the commercial 
communications. 
8. In regulation 23 of the principal regulations, in sub-regulation (1), after clause (b), the 
following clause shall be inserted, namely:- 
“(c) to appeal to the Appellate Authority within a period of 15 days from the date of receipt 
of information about the resolution of the complaint  when the consumer is not satisfied 
with the redressal of the complaint by the Access provider, or the complaint remain 
unaddressed, or no intimation of redressal of the complaint is received by the complainant 
within a period of fifteen(15)  days from the date of registering complaint, whichever is 
earlier. The complainant shall be able to prefer such appeal through any of the modes 
specified for lodging a complaint or report under these Regulations. 
The Appellate Authority shall resolve and reply to such appeal within a period of fifteen 
(15) days from the date of its receipt. 
Every Access Provider shall designate a permanent employee working at senior 
management level as the Appellate Authority. The name and contact details of such 
designated officer shall be duly published at a prominent place on the official website of 
the concerned Access Provider.” 
 
 
12 
 
9. In regulation 24 of the of the principal regulations,  
(i) in sub-regulation (2), for the words [“complaint or report regarding violation”] the 
words “complaint including appeal, if any or report regarding violation” shall be 
substituted. 
(ii) in sub-regulation (3), the following sub-regulation shall be substituted, namely: -  
“(3) to record three years’ history, complainant-wise, with details of all complaints including 
appeal, if any and alleged violations reported by the complainants, with date and time, 
and status of resolution of complaints including the supporting documents used by the 
access providers for resolving the complaints;” 
(iii) in sub-regulation (4), the following sub-regulation shall be substituted namely:-  
“to record three years history of sender(s) against which complaint including appeal, if any 
is made or reported with details of all complaint(s) including appeal, if any, with date(s) 
and time(s), and status of resolution of complaints;” 
 
10. For regulation 25 of the principal regulations, the following regulation shall be 
substituted, namely:-  
“25. Complaint Mechanism: Every Access Provider shall establish systems, functions and 
processes to resolve complaints made by the Customers; corroborate the complaint data with 
the data of senders suspected of sending UCC by the AI/ML based UCC detect systems 
across all the access providers,;  and take remedial action against Senders as provided 
hereunder (Sender herein shall mean a sender or telemarketer, who has been allotted the 
telecom resource by the access provider, that has been used for making such communication, 
and against which the UCC complaint has been made.):- 
(1) Terminating Access Provider shall record the complaint and report on DL-Complaints 
in non- repudiable and immutable manner and shall notify, in real time, the details of 
the complaint to the concerned Originating Access Provider (OAP) except when it is not 
possible to do so as stipulated in sub-clause (2); 
(2) in instances where there is non-availability of complete telephone number of the Sender 
or Header in the complaint registered, TAP shall communicate to the Customer about