1 
 
Draft for Comments of the Stakeholders 
 
 
भारतीय दूरसंचार विवियामक प्राविकरण 
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONSULTATION PAPER  
 
ON  
 
DRAFT AMENDMENTS 
 
IN 
 
‘THE STANDARDS OF QUALITY OF SERVICE OF 
ACCESS (WIRELINE AND WIRELESS) AND 
BROADBAND (WIRELINE AND WIRELESS) SERVICE 
REGULATIONS, 2024’ 
 
 
New Delhi, India 
5th August 2026 
 
 
 
World Trade Center, Tower-F, Nauroji Nagar, New Delhi-110029 
Website: www.trai.gov.in 

2 
 
 
The document seeking comments from stakeholders contains 
following information:  
 
1. The draft notification for proposed amendment in ‘The Standards 
of Quality of Service of Access (Wireline and Wireless) and 
Broadband (Wireline and Wireless) Service Regulations, 202 4’ 
with explanatory note.  
2. Annexure-I: Global Best Practices for Publication of Coverage 
Map 
3. Annexure-II: Clarification letter dated 20th March 2025 issued by 
TRAI. 
4. Annexure-III: Clarification letter dated 21st April 2025 issued by 
TRAI. 
5. Annexure-IV: Principal regulations incorporating proposed 
amendment for ease of reference. This will however not be a part 
of final notification to be issued for amendment. 
6. Annexure-V: List of Acronyms 
 
 
Stakeholders are requested to submit their comments  or feedback on 
the draft amendments or any other relevant provisions in ‘The 
Standards of Quality of Service of Access (Wireline and Wireless) and 
Broadband (Wireline and Wireless) Service  Regulations, 2024’ by 26th 
August 2026  and counter comments by 7th September 2026.  
 
 
The inputs/ comments / counter-comments may be sent  in following 
format with due justification, preferably in electronic form, to Advisor 
(QoS-I), TRAI on the email id adv-qos1@trai.gov.in, which will be posted 
on TRAI’s website www.trai.gov.in. 
 
3 
 
 
S. 
No. 
Para number 
of draft 
notification 
Input/ Comment/ 
Counter- Comment 
Justification 
with supporting 
reference, if any 
    
    
 
For any clarification/information, Shri Tejpal Singh, Advisor (QoS -I) 
may be contacted at email: adv-qos1@trai.gov.in 
 
 
  
4 
 
DRAFT NOTIFICATION FOR PROPOSED AMENDMENTS 
 
TO BE PUBLISHED IN THE GAZETTE OF INDIA 
 EXTRAORDINARY PART III SECTION 4 
 
TELECOM REGULATORY AUTHORITY OF INDIA  
NOTIFICATION  
New Delhi | Dated: _____ 2026 
F. No. RG-17/(3)/2022-QoS: In exercise of the powers conferred upon it by 
section 36, read with sub-clauses (i) and (v) of clause (b) of sub-section (1) of 
section 11, of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act 1997 (24 of 1997), 
the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India hereby makes the following 
regulations further to amend “The Standards of Quality of Service of Access 
(Wireline and Wireless) and Broadband (Wireline and Wireless) Service 
Regulations, 2024 (06 of 2024)”, namely:- 
THE STANDARDS OF QUALITY OF SERVICE OF ACCESS (WIRELINE 
AND WIRELESS) AND BROADBAND (WIRELINE AND WIRELESS) 
SERVICE (FIRST AMENDMENT) REGULATIONS, 2026 (XX of 2026) 
1. Short title and commencement.—  
(a) These regulations may be called the Standards of Quality of Service of 
Access (Wireline and Wireless) and Broadband (Wireline and Wireless) 
Service (First Amendment) Regulations, 2026.  
(b) These shall come into force with effect from 1st October 2026. 
 
2. In sub-regulation (1) of regulation 2 of the Standards of Quality of Service 
of Access (Wireline and Wireless) and Broadband (Wireline and Wireless) 
Service, 2024 (06 of 2024), (herein after referred to as the principal 
regulations), after serial number (s), following shall be inserted, namely: - 
5 
 
“(sa) “Physical Resource Block” or “PRB” is the fundamental unit of radio 
resource allocation in 4G LTE and 5G New Radio (NR) networks. It 
represents a defined portion of radio spectrum over a specific time interval 
and serves as the basic scheduling unit through which a cell allocates 
radio resources to user equipment (UE) for data transmission and 
reception.” 
 
3. In regulation 4 of the principal regulations, against serial number (ii) of 
table under sub-regulation (1), the name of parameter shall be substituted 
as “Fault incidences (No. of faults per 100 subscribers/month)”. 
 
4. In regulation 6 of the principal regulations, - 
(a) Against serial number (i), (iv) and (xiv)  of table under sub -regulation 
(1), following shall be substituted, namely: - 
S. No. Name of Parameter 
Bench
mark 
Assessment 
period  
Effective 
date 
(i) 
Accuracy of service wise 
geospatial coverage map 
published on service 
provider’s website 
≥ 98% Monthly 01.10.2026 
(iv) 
Percentage of significant 
network outage reported 
to the Authority within 
24 hrs of start of the 
outage  
Note:  Significant 
Network Outage is 
defined as an event 
where access service 
(wireless) in a district 
remains unavailable for 
a continuous period 
100% Monthly 01.10.2026 
6 
 
exceeding four (4) hours, 
or where more than ten 
percent (10%) of  
subscribers in the 
Licensed Service Area 
(LSA) experience 
complete loss of service 
for a continuous period 
exceeding four (4) hours. 
 
Rebate to the 
subscribers for 
significant network 
outages of more than 
24 hrs:  
• For post -paid 
subscribers 
registered in the 
district or affected 
post-paid 
subscribers, as 
applicable: 
Proportional rent 
rebate, as per plan 
charges, for affected 
number of days shall 
be credited in next 
bill.  
• For the  pre-paid 
subscribers 
registered in the 
district or affected 
7 
 
pre-paid 
subscribers, as 
applicable: The 
validity of subscribed 
tariff offering shall be 
increased by equal 
number of affected 
days. 
(xiv) 
Tariff offerings in which 
80th percentile value of 
measured download and 
upload speed is ≥ offered 
typical download and 
upload speed  for 4G/ 
5G technology  
100% Monthly 01.10.2026 
 
(b) In table under sub -regulation (1), after serial number (xiv), following 
shall be inserted, namely: - 
S. No. Name of Parameter 
Bench
mark 
Assessment 
period  
Effective 
date 
V. Network Slicing 
(xv) 
Cells having daily PRB 
utilisation > 80% (in 5G 
network) 
≤ 1% Monthly 01.10.2026 
 
(c) In sub-regulation (2), the words “technology wise”  shall be inserted 
before the words “ typical download and upload speed”  and word 
“consumers” shall be substituted with word “subscribers”.  
(d) After sub -regulation (2) of the principal regulations, following sub -
regulations shall be inserted, namely: - 
8 
 
“(3) Every service provider, planning to create a new network slice in 
their 5G network, shall submit the details of proposed and existing 
network slice parameters, at least twenty one (21) days in advance to 
the Authority, clearly demonstrating the availability of sufficient 
capacity in the cell(s) which are part of different slices, in such manner 
and format as may be directed by the Authority, from time to time.” 
 
5. In regulation 7 of the principal regulations, in table under sub-regulation 
(1), after serial number (vi), following shall be inserted, namely: - 
S. No. Name of Parameter 
Bench
mark 
Assessment 
period  
Effective 
date 
(vii) Silence Call Rate ≤ 1% Monthly 01.10.2026 
 
6. In regulation 9 of the principal regulations, -  
(a) Against serial number (iv)  and (vii) of table under sub -regulation (1), 
following shall be substituted, namely: - 
S. No. Name of Parameter 
Benchm
ark 
Assessment 
period  
(iv) 
Tariff offerings in which 90 th 
percentile value of measured 
download and upload speed is 
≥ offered typical download and 
upload speed 
100% Quarterly 
(vii) Fault incidences (No. of faults 
per 100 subscribers/month) 
≤ 5 Quarterly 
 
 
9 
 
(b) In table under sub -regulation (1), after serial number (ix), following 
shall be inserted, namely: - 
S. No. Name of Parameter 
Benchm
ark 
Assessment 
period  
(x) Mean Time-To-Repair (MTTR) 
≤ 10 
hours 
Quarterly 
(xi) 
Percentage of significant 
network outage reported to the 
Authority within 24 hrs of start 
of the outage  
Note: Significant Network 
Outage is defined as an event 
where broadband (wireline) 
service in a district remains 
unavailable for a continuous 
period exceeding four (4) hours, 
or where more than ten percent 
(10%) of subscribers in the 
Service Area experience 
complete loss of service or 
material degradation in service 
quality for a continuous period 
exceeding four (4) hours. 
Material degradation in service 
quality shall mean a reduction 
of twenty percent (20%) or more 
in the download  or upload 
speed experienced by a 
subscriber vis-à-vis the 
declared typical download or 
upload speed.   
100% Quarterly 
10 
 
Rebate to the subscribers for 
significant network outages 
of more than 24 hrs:  
• For post -paid subscribers 
registered in the district or 
affected post -paid 
subscribers, as applicable : 
Proportional rent rebate, as 
per plan charges, for affected 
number of days shall be 
credited in next bill. 
• For the pre -paid 
subscribers registered in 
the district or affected pre-
paid subscribers, as 
applicable: The validity of 
subscribed tariff offering 
shall be increased by equal 
number of affected days. 
 
(c) In the explanation under sub-regulation (2), the words “ fixed wireless 
and” shall be deleted.  
 
7. In regulation 10 of the principal regulations, - 
(a) Against serial number (ii) of table under sub -regulation (1), following 
shall be substituted, namely: - 
S. No. Name of Parameter Benchmark 
(ii) Resolution of billing/ charging complaints 
within one week 
100% 
 
11 
 
(b) Following proviso to the sub-regulation (1) shall be deleted, namely: - 
“Provided that  the s ervice provider providing both access service 
(wireline) and broadband (wireline) service shall meet the benchmarks 
for both the services on aggregated basis.” 
 
(c) In the explanation under sub-regulation (1), the words “ fixed wireless 
and” shall be deleted. 
 
8. In regulation 15 of the principal regulations, -   
(a) In sub-regulation (1), after clause (d), following clause shall be inserted, 
namely: - 
“(e) Service wise Quality of Experience Score (QoES) of service providers 
based on various parameters of network performance, consumer 
service, and consumer perception collected through multiple sources;” 
 
(b) In sub-regulation (3), after the words “manner and format,”, the words 
“as broadly specified under Schedule III and” shall be inserted and the 
words “by consumers” shall be deleted. 
 
9. In regulation 16 of the principal regulations, - 
(a) In sub-regulation (1), after the words “ one lakh per benchmark”, the 
words “per compliance report” shall be inserted. 
 
(b) Sub-regulation (2), Sub-regulation (3) and Sub -regulation (4) shall be 
deleted, namely: - 
“(2) If the compliance report furnished by the service provider under 
regulation 13 is found to be false, it shall, without prejudice to the terms 
and conditions of its license or authorization, or the Act or rules or 
regulations or orders made, or, directi ons issued thereunder, be liable 
to pay an amount, by way of financial disincentive, not exceeding 
rupees two lakhs per benchmark, for which such false report has been 
furnished, for the first contravention as the Authority may, by order, 
direct: 
12 
 
Provided that  if the compliance report furnished by the service 
provider under regulation 13 is found to be false for the same parameter 
consecutively in two or more subsequent months or quarters, as 
applicable, the service provider shall be liable to pay, by way of financial 
disincentives, an amount not exceeding rupees five lakhs for the second 
consecutive false reporting and not exceeding rupees ten lakhs for each 
consecutive false reporting occurring thereafter. 
(3) No order for payment of any amount by way of financial disincentive 
shall be made by the Authority unless the service provider has been 
given a reasonable opportunity of representing against the 
contravention of the regulation observed by the Authority. 
(4) The amount payable by way of financial disincentive under these 
regulations shall be remitted to such head of account as may be 
specified by the Authority.” 
10. After regulation 16 of the principal regulations, following regulations 
shall be inserted, namely: - 
“16A.  Consequences for the failure of service providers to submit 
correct compliance reports. - (1) If the compliance report furnished by 
the service provider under regulation 13 is found to be false, it shall, 
without prejudice to the terms and conditions of its license or 
authorization, or the Act or rules or regulations or orders made, or, 
directions issued thereunder, be liable to pay an amount, by way of 
financial disincentive, not exceeding rupees two lakhs per benchmark per 
compliance report, for which such false report has been furnished, for the 
first contravention as the Authority may, by order, direct: 
Provided that if the compliance report furnished by the service provider 
under regulation 13 is found to be false for the same parameter 
consecutively in two or more months or quarters, as applicable, the service 
provider shall be liable to pay, by way of financial dis incentives, an 
amount not exceeding rupees five lakhs for the second consecutive false 
reporting and not exceeding rupees ten lakhs for each consecutive false 
reporting occurring thereafter.